# Behaviour

The [`temporalBehaviour()`](../reference/temporalBehaviour.md) and the
[`spatialBehaviour()`](../reference/spatialBehaviour.md) functions allow
computing wind speed and direction along the lifespan of a tropical
cyclone. The [`temporalBehaviour()`](../reference/temporalBehaviour.md)
function focuses on the temporal variation at a specific location while
the [`spatialBehaviour()`](../reference/spatialBehaviour.md) function
focuses on the spatial variation over a given area. Both functions also
allow to compute summary statistics about the behaviour of the wind
generated by cyclones. Three summary statistics are available: maximum
sustained wind speed, power dissipation index, and the duration of
exposure to winds reaching defined speed thresholds.

### Maximum sustained wind speed

The maximum sustained wind speed (MSW, in $m.s^{- 1}$) over the lifespan
of a storm is computed as follows:

$$\max\left( v(t)|t \in \lbrack 0,T\rbrack \right)$$

where $t$ is the time of the observation  
$T$ is the lifespan of the storm  

### Power Dissipation Index

The power dissipation index (PDI, in $J.m^{- 2}$) or total power
dissipated by unit area by a tropical storm over its lifespan (Emanuel
1999, 2005) is computed as follows:

$$\int_{T}\rho \times C_{d} \times v_{r}^{3}\ dt$$

where $t$ is the time of the observation  
$T$ is the lifespan of the storm  
$\rho$ is the air density fixed to $1$$kg.m^{- 3}$ as in Emanuel
(1999)  
$C_{d}$ is the drag coefficient of the storm fixed to $2$ X $10^{- 3}$
as in Emanuel (1999)  

### Duration of exposure

The duration of exposure (in $hours$) to winds reaching defined speed
thresholds is computed as follows:

$$\int_{T}c\left( v_{t} \right)dt$$

$$\left\{ \begin{aligned}
{c\left( v_{t} \right)} & {= 1\quad if\quad v_{t} \geq Thd} \\
{c\left( v_{t} \right)} & {= 0\quad if\quad v_{t} < Thd} \\
 & 
\end{aligned} \right.$$

where  
$t$ is the time of the observation  
$T$ is the lifespan of the storm  
$v_{t}$ is the maximum sustained wind speed at time $t$ (in
$m.s^{- 1}$)  
$Thd$ is the minimum wind sped threshold (in $m.s^{- 1}$)  

By default the duration of exposure is computed for each Saffir-Simpson
Hurricane Scale threshold values for tropical cyclone categories (i.e.,
$33$, $43$, $50$ ,$58$, and $70$$m.s^{- 1}$, (Simpson 1974)) but can be
defined using the `wind_threshold` argument.

## References

Emanuel, Kerry A. 1999. “The Power of a Hurricane: An Example of
Reckless Driving on the Information Superhighway.” *Weather* 54 (4):
107–8. <https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1477-8696.1999.tb06435.x>.

———. 2005. “Increasing Destructiveness of Tropical Cyclones over the
Past 30 Years.” *Nature* 436 (7051): 686–88.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03906>.

Simpson, R. H. 1974. “The Hurricane Disaster—Potential Scale.”
*Weatherwise*, July. <https://doi.org/10.1080/00431672.1974.9931702>.
