---
title: 'StormR: An R package to quantify and map the tropical storms
and cyclones’ winds characteristics'
tags:
- R
- tropical storms
- cyclones
date: "05 June 2023"
output:
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
  pdf_document: default
authors:
- name: Baptiste Delaporte
  affiliation: 1
- name: Thomas Arsouze
  orcid: "0000-0002-8871-6120"
  corresponding: yes
  affiliation: 2, 3
- name: Gunnar Keppel
  orcid: "0000-0001-7092-6149"
  affiliation: 3, 4
- name: Swen Jullien
  orcid: "0000-0002-5389-0532"
  affiliation: 5
- name: Christophe Menkes
  orcid: "0000-0002-1457-9696"
  affiliation: 6
- name: Thomas Ibanez
  orcid: "0000-0002-3192-1721"
  affiliation: 3
bibliography: stormr.bib
affiliations:
- name: Independent Researcher, France
  index: 1
- name: CIRAD, UMR AMAP, F‐34398 Montpellier, France
  index: 2
- name: AMAP, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, CNRS, INRAE, IRD, Montpellier, France
  index: 3
- name: UniSA STEM and Future Industries Institute, University of South Australia,
    GPO Box 2471, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia
  index: 4
- name: Ifremer, Univ. Brest, CNRS, IRD, Laboratoire d'Océanographie Physique et Spatiale
    (LOPS), IUEM, Plouzané, France
  index: 5
- name: ENTROPIE, IRD, CNRS, Ifremer, Université de la Réunion, Université de la Nouvelle-Calédonie
  index: 6
---

# Summary

`StormR` is an R package allowing to easily extract storm track data from a 
provided database, generate surface wind fields (speed and direction) as 
re-constructed from storm track data and a parametric cyclone model. Then 
`StormR` allows computing three summary statistics (the maximum sustained wind 
speed, the power dissipation index, and the duration of exposure to winds reaching 
a given wing speed along the cyclone life span) and plotting the results. We 
suggest to use the IBTrACS (International Best Track Archive for Climate 
Stewardship) database as input [@knapp_international_2010; @knapp_international_2018]. 
This database provides a fairly comprehensive record of tropical 
storms and cyclones with a 3-hours temporal resolution since 1841. 
However any storm track data can be used as long as the mandatory fields 
are provided.

Storm track data can be extracted using a specified point location,
a user defined spatial polygon shapefile, a country or a cyclone basin name. 
The main functions of the `StormR` package allow to generate wind speed and 
direction fields as re-constructed from storm track data and a 
parametric cyclone model. Different models and models combinations can be chosen 
by the user. By default the spatial resolution is set to 2.5 min 
(~4.5 km at the equator), but a finer spatial resolution of 30 s (~1
km at the equator) and coarser spatial resolutions of 5 min (~9 km at the
equator) or 10 min (~18.6 km at the equator) can be set. The temporal 
resolution is set to 1 hour by default but finer resolutions of 45 min,
30 min, or 15 min can be set.

Once wind speed is generated for each cell or specific location 
and each time step, `StormR` functions can compute summary statistics on 
wind speed over the lifespan of a storm. Summary statistics encompass the
maximum sustained wind speed, the power dissipation index or total power 
dissipated by a tropical storm [@emanuel_power_1999; @emanuel_increasing_2005], 
and the duration of exposure to winds reaching defined speed thresholds. 
By default the duration of exposure is computed for each Saffir-Simpson 
Hurricane Scale threshold values for tropical cyclone categories, 
i.e., $33$, $43$, $50$ ,$58$, and $70$ $m.s^{-1}$ [@simpson_hurricane_2010], 
but can be defined by the user.

# Statement of need

Globally, an average of 86 tropical cyclones per year occurred over the past 
four decades [@murakami_detected_2020]. These disturbances cause severe 
damages to ecosystems, infrastructures, and peoples [@costanza_value_2008; 
@uriarte_hurricane_2019; @parks_tropical_2021]. Climate change has likely 
increased the proportion of category 3-5 tropical cyclones on the Saffir–Simpson 
hurricane wind scale over the past four decades and climate scientists are 
predicting with high confidence that the proportion of the most intense and 
potentially the most destructive tropical cyclones (category 4-5) would 
increase by +10% even if warming is limited to 1.5°C 
[@intergovernmental_panel_on_climate_change_technical_2023]. `StormR` R package
responds to the need for an easy to use tool that helps to better understand 
winds generated by storms and tropical cyclones in relation to potential damages.

To our knowledge two R packages `HurreconR` [@Boose_HurreconR_2023] and
`hurricaneexposure` [@Brooke_hurricaneexposure_2020] are available on R CRAN. 
As highlighted by their names, these two packages have a strong focus on the 
North American basin where tropical cyclones are named hurricanes. Another 
important limitation of those packages is that they both rely on a single model 
to reconstruct wind speed. The `HurreconR` package relies on the HURRECON 
model [@boose_landscape_2001; @boose_landscape_2004], a modification of 
the @holland_analytic_1980 model, and the `hurricaneexposure` package relies on
the Willoughby's model [@willoughby_parametric_2006]. Many model exists and 
none of these is the best for all tropical cyclones and storms 
[@yan_research_2022]. Compared to those packages, the `StormR` R package 
allows to reconstruct wind behaviour for tropical storms and cyclones anywhere, 
anytime, and this with a set of models including those used in `HurreconR` 
and `hurricaneexposure` packages.

# Package workflow

The workflow of the `stormR` R package consists of four main consecutive steps:

**1**- The `defStormsDataset()` function is used to create a `stormsDataset` 
object from a NetCDF file, e.g., exported from a storm track database such as
IBTrACS database (https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/products/international-best-track-archive)
[@knapp_international_2010; @knapp_international_2018]. 

**2**- The `defStormsList()` function is used to perform queries on the 
`stormsDataset` object and extract storms of interest based on their location 
and date of occurrence. The track data for these storms are then stored into a
`stormsList` object. The `plotStorms()` function can be used to see the 
extracted data. 

**3**- The `temporalBehaviour()` and `spatialBehaviour()` functions are 
used to compute wind speed and direction and three summary statistics: the 
maximum sustained wind speed, the power dissipation index, and the duration 
of exposure to winds reaching a given wind speed along the life span of 
the cyclones. The `temporalBehaviour()` function returns time series at 
specific point locations (list of data frames) while the `spatialBehaviour()` 
function returns spatial data (rasters).

**4**- The `writeRast()` and `plotBehaviour()` functions are used to 
export or see the final results.  

![Simplified workflow and main functions of the `stormR`
R package. External storm track database in grey, main functions in blue, and 
R objects created by the `stormR` functions in yellow.](images/stormR_workflow.png)

# Example

A `test_dataset` is provided with the `StormR` package. This test data set 
comprises the track data of nine storms that occurred near Vanuatu and 
New Caledonia between 2015-2016 and 2020-2021, respectively. 
Figure 2 shows how the `spatialBehaviour()` function can compute different 
products for the tropical cyclone Pam (2015) near Vanuatu.

![Example of outputs for the tropical cyclone Pam (2015) nearby 
Vanuatu with default settings. Storm track data (SSHS=Saffir-Simpson Hurricane 
Scale, TD=tropical depression, TS=tropical storm), maximum sustained wind (MSW),
power dissipation index (PDI), and duration of exposure to wind stronger than 
58 $m.s^{-1}$. Plots were generated with the `plotStorms()` and `plotBehaviour()` 
functions as shown in the [`spatialBehaviour` article](https://umr-amap.github.io/StormR/articles/SpatialBehaviour.html).](images/stormR_example.png)

# Acknowledgements

Work was supported by a Hermon Slade Foundation grant 
[grant HSF 19105](http://www.hermonslade.org.au/hsf-19105/). GK was partially 
supported by the Montpellier Advanced Knowledge Institute on Transitions 
(MAK'IT) as part of a Visiting Scientist Fellowship while working on parts of 
the manuscript. 

# References
